it was my idol right he's my father I'm
a young kid a boy and here he is like
I'm like dad what happens when we die
and he's like well you cease to exist in
your body brats
what are you feeling now now we're
getting somewhere now you're feeling now
the armor is coming down what is that
what are you feeling when you talk about
your dad when you tell that story you be
I feel let down
I feel abandoned right I feel vulnerable
again as I did more I see anger oh yeah
oh yeah fair
of course one two three hi I'm Ethan
Evans I'm happy to be here this is gonna
be fun my whole community is waiting too
so we're all good to go
is that better keep talking yeah sure
let's see what's reet auch about today
you were asking about the weather it's
cold here we've had a ton of snow it's
skiing time at the end of the day oh
where are you located Seattle Washington
actually I know you through Devin he and
I were lucky enough to be in the same
city it's how we stream together
oh cool very cool oh okay he's too loud
now I'm too loud okay all right okay how
about okay I think we're good now
so okay so so yeah so we're talking a
little bit about sort of stress
management and burnout we're talking
about workplace stress yeah yeah not so
much burnout but I'm an executive at
Amazon and so I wanted I thought it'd be
a good topic for us to talk about about
how people could handle their stress at
work and of course people would love for
you to advise me how to be a less
stressful boss for them okay like what
can executives do differently and then I
have my own stress issues I'm happy to
share okay and learn about cuz we have
this time and we have next Friday - yeah
so I think the first thing is oddly
enough what I do want which is not
actually what my area of expertise is
what my area of expertise is is what we
are talking about yes so I know that in
my day job I I do some work at different
kinds of corporations investment banks
startups hospitals in sort of stress
management programs and sort of helping
people optimize their performance manage
stress things like that so this is I
love talking about this stuff because
it's kind of right up my alley so what
is - yeah go ahead
all right that's that's that's that's
what I thought would be good is this is
like your sweet spot and yet I have to
think because the stream I do on Twitch
is like what Devin does a lot we're
trying to help people build their
careers and be successful at work so
it's not classic gaming at all and
stress and managing stress is a lot
about having a successful career
absolutely so
having occur a successful career is also
about managing stress yes true yeah so I
tend to work best when I use actual like
scenarios as opposed to abstract
examples yep so can you just tell me a
little bit about what you find stressful
or what people in your workplace might
may find stressful yeah I thought a lot
about this so Amazon is famously known
as a difficult workplace and we have a
number of leadership principles one of
which is called high standards and the
leadership principle reads Amazon has
relentlessly high standards standards
that others may find unreasonable and so
as a leader I'm supposed to hold people
to this and also my managers also hold
me to it
so then being specific like a specific
situation would be performance of a
program I'm working on I'll have to be a
little circumspect about you know
financial details and stuff but if a
program isn't hitting financial goals or
isn't hitting growth goals you have a
ton of stress because you know you're
going to be asked about it you know
you're going to spend time writing long
explanations of why it is and culturally
it is common for leaders to still
express disappointment to say well okay
you've explained it all but it's still
like the fundamental problem is it's
still not good enough results do better
and often their feedback is more you go
do better or not I can help you okay so
so I think so this is your culture
sounds a lot like the culture of you
know top tier academic medical centers
yes so so you know I think any any time
you go to sort of the top of a field if
you're talking about like a place like
Goldman Sachs or Mass General Hospital
which are amazing institutions they have
a very sort of outcome oriented approach
right and and results are what matters
so like in the world of academic
medicine research funding can be very
cutthroat and whether like whether you
get you live or die by your grand
and if you don't get a grant you don't
have a job yep and it can be very hard
and so that's just sort of the culture
because it's a culture of performance
right yeah absolutely and that's our
culture too yeah so the first question
that I have for you is does a culture of
performance lead to the best performance
I don't know the thought would be of
course it does right the performance is
important then that you're setting the
standard and that you're talking about
it and so a culture of performance
should create performance that would be
the idea that's generally what people
think right which is why they have
cultures of performance because they
believe that if we have a culture of
performance then people will live up to
the standard that we set and it's all
about meeting standards yeah so let's
just talk about you for a second okay
when have you done when do you do your
best work so huh I love how you put me
on the spot I actually do my best work
outside of work like not in the office
when I can get clear thinking time I do
the best work in my lounge chair sitting
over here in my house okay so let's just
think about what that means yeah you say
I do my best work when I get clear
thinking time yep right so the question
is what are the risk factors for clear
thinking time and what are the risk
factors for unclear thinking time okay
so what leads to unclear thinking
distractions sure and mental pressure or
feeling attacked or judged because then
you're spending your time on your
emotions and on how you're gonna get
yourself feeling better so that you can
focus on the actual work okay so when
you're thinking about how your boss is
going to respond to your work product
yeah what does that do to your thinking
well it adds stress it can add clarity
in the sense that you can reason through
like okay what is my boss need if I
think he's going to respond this way can
i address that so it can add clarity but
particularly if the feedback from a
leader is negative it can also just get
you churning and cycling on absolutely
I feel judged I feel inadequate so just
to be clear like if we're talking about
those feelings do those put us in a
clear thinking mindset earn unclear
thinking unclear
uncaps aloo right now so if we stop and
we actually think about you you do your
best work when you're thinking clearly
which is sort of a no-brainer and the
interesting thing is that you you sort
of talk about sitting particularly in a
lounge chair so there's a space that's
sort of like a stress-free space where
you're not actually concerned about how
your bosses are gonna respond to
something so you can actually devote
yourself to the thing that your bosses
want you to do yep right you can devote
yourself to the work as opposed to
devoting yourself to performance yes
what do you think about that is that I
mean disagree let's think about caveats
restate the proposition ones so you do
your best work when you have a clear
head and when you have a clear head
you're not actually thinking about
performance in fact what I would say
that a clear head is for you is that
you're not worried about performance and
you're worried about the task at hand or
the actual work there's doing the work
and then there's whether the work lives
up to standards right you know it's like
creating a good product and whether my
boss is gonna be happy with these are
separate things in your mind yep you
should be focused on doing the best work
not what people are gonna think of it if
you focus on work product you get the
best work
what does Amazon's work culture well
it's hard to generalize 600,000 people
what
Amazon's work culture has a lot of
review another principle we have is
called dive deep and so leaders
including myself were expected to audit
others okay expected to dig into what
they're doing and then my leaders above
me or
to dig into and audit what I'm doing
absolutely and so you can anticipate or
expect being audited yeah and and so
that puts the culture is one where you
end up thinking about the standards not
just about the work and how do you think
that impacts the work that's the
operative question to the I think so I
feel like you're fishing in a sense and
I want to give a dual answer fine
overly stressing about it lowers the
quality of work being aware of the
standards so that you know what the goal
is has value but when that tips over
into fear or worry it becomes a
distraction yeah so I think I think
you're you're sort of right that I'm
kind of fishing for something and in a
sense I think that in my mind that's the
right answer
so I think one thing that we oftentimes
forget about stress is that we use the
word stress to actually mean distress so
there are two types of stress there's
you stress and distress but we've lost
that distinction yes you stress I've
heard that term and know about it but
you're right I never hear it and so
that's just because we sort of forget
that like okay so when you have
capabilities and you have a task the
relationship between your capabilities
and your task results in a number of
different things if the task outweighs
your capabilities your D you're in
distress because your handle it if the
task is too easy then what happens to
your performance you become bored and
you may do the task okay but your
motivation drops absent or so would you
say that that your effort towards the
task and your success at the task if the
easier the task gets what happens to the
quality of the work that you produce
does it just get higher and higher no I
think it flatlines if the task is really
easy you sort of take it to a limit and
then you move on and you look for
something else
ABB's
right so that's kind of weird because if
we're saying that the difficulty of the
task is like a like if we talk about a
slope right now and if and this is our
capability and here's the difficulty of
the task know that as we go to high our
performance drops but interestingly
enough if we go to low our performance
actually drops yep makes sense that
middle zone is what's called you stress
so this is when the body and brain are
literally primed to wear so you have a
certain amount of stress hormones that
are active so one example of this is
like adrenaline where adrenaline causes
you to literally lose your peripheral
vision and focus on a narrow perspective
like literally if you look at the stunt
the physiology of the eye when you have
adrenaline at a high level in your body
normally your peripheral vision is
actually about 180 degrees which a lot
of people don't realize right and then
as adrenaline increases it narrows down
to a field of view of 30 degrees yep and
so i've experienced this yeah so at 180
it's easy to become distracted because
you're seeing this over there and you're
seeing this over there but if your
adrenaline level is too too high then
you also get this sort of tunnel vision
when it's easy to lose perspective and
when you talk about an unclear mind I
think you're kind of hitting it right on
the head where you know you want to know
that people are gonna be checking your
work you want to know that your bosses
are gonna be expecting a lot from you
but then you can easily collapse down in
a tunnel vision where you start worrying
about that and then we tip into the
distress we tip into non optimal
performance no and I think I've thought
about it right I've been at Amazon 15
years I've had a lot of time to think
about the culture I think a lot of the
culture and I think this is common in
workplaces leaders lead through a
scarcity mindset where they believe that
if they say too much positive about your
work you'll get lazy in other words if
they're not constantly pushing you'll
you won't do it out of your own
motivation you're only doing it because
you're being challenged and the result
is most of the
in many cases I hear this Donnell ID not
only see it I hear it a lot most of the
feedback is okay that was great
now here's 12 more things that could be
better right in other words when
something gets evaluated it's one good
thing about it and then ten possible
improvements yeah so I think the that's
you know I understand how that works
because I think that's also how the
cultures of like most top and companies
or institutions in their field function
time and at the same time I don't
believe in my experience I think there's
another way which is actually better
tell me more so so this is sort of
finding that area of you stress where
the degree of stress that you have
actually Prime's your mind enough and
gets you to I think a good example of
this is the flow State so you stress
facilitates a flow State yes so you
can't be bored and get into a flow
straight I can't be panicked and get
into a flow State that there are good
studies that show that optimal work
product comes from a flow State but I
think the culture that Amazon has and
it's not my place to judge but you know
we're talking about I'm not saying it's
good I think it's common so MGH is the
same way Harvard Medical School is the
same way is that they have a very
performance oriented culture that often
times tips people into distress and
impostor syndrome and these kinds of
things and that at the end of the day
someone who is that that's not going to
be the best work product that I think
that like the best work product comes
when you have an employee who's actually
inspired to do the thing that they want
to do and you do have a certain amount
of kind of oversight that keeps people
honest because there's also studies that
show that if you really give people a
free rein that are gonna start slack off
and they're gonna work just as hard as
they can to like not get fired now so
both - yep and I think it also depends
on on what level you're talking about
within an organization because I think
that when people have demonstrated a
high degree of internal motivation and
value with like putting out like they
demonstrate personal pride and doing
good work I think you can be more
encouraging
because they're gonna have that natural
for lack of a better term like
neuroticism so an in medical school for
example medical students are highly
highly neurotic which is how we get
there so we worry a lot on the inside
we're afraid that we didn't study enough
we're afraid that we're not gonna do
well enough on the test our neuroticism
is already high enough in it and it
strives us to be successful in the world
it's not a negative trait in terms of
performance but once you get to medical
school you would be amazed at how much
you can get a medical student to perform
because their neuroticism is already
high they don't need it from their boss
in fact encouragement in like lets them
do better so like when you say hey like
I can see that you learned a lot about
lisinopril and ace inhibitors that's
awesome I think this patient is really
going to do better because you kind of
know this information it's really useful
information and then I'm like what's
that like what's that what they're gonna
do is go home the next day and they're
gonna be like since they're so starved
for positive reinforcement there that is
gonna reinforce their behavior to be
like tomorrow when I go to work I want
them to say that again and I want them
to say it again and I want them to say
it again that's like an endorphin hit
right positive feedback in a high and a
high performance culture yeah and and I
think interestingly I don't think we do
a very good job of that in corporate
America in other words what you're
describing in the medical school is
actually more positive than what and of
course I'm generalizing I'm speaking for
my own experience and not on behalf of
the company but I see some leaders do
better than others but overall it's it's
a there's an opportunity for improvement
there and that's what I'm interested
both in sharing with our audiences and
also your advice on how we can like
change corporate America a little bit
over time yeah so I think let's I'm
gonna take a step back that's really
useful to know so first of all you know
the main question is does the culture of
performance actually lead to optimal
performance right and my aunt's I think
that while we see it widely amongst
corporate America and top-tier
institutions so I think that the data
sort of would imply that the answer is
the
I think there's a lot of interesting
work work happen to get like HBS and
other places where I do a little bit of
work here there right it that suggests
otherwise so like I know that when I go
to actual like investment banks or
private equity fund firms and I teach
them how to meditate and I teach them
sort of a different way to look at
things they their performance actually
improves so like their metrics get
better and what I mean by that is so I
think the real challenge here so Ethan
let me ask you a question so first of
all a couple questions one is that I can
like kind of talk and if that's good and
what you're interested in I can continue
to do that so I was gonna explain like
one very important nuance that I think a
lot of corporate America doesn't
understand the other thing that I can do
is ask you more personal questions about
like your specific stress and and
because I think we're gonna we can get a
lot of rich information there I don't
know what you're interested in or what
you signed up for so I'm I did sign up
you know I've watched a bunch of your
shows because I co stream with Devin
like you did in the past
so I'm perfectly happy to talk about
myself and reveal personal get out my
own struggles since I'm an executive I'm
not sure that's always the most helpful
to our audiences who aren't always there
I don't know but I'm happy to do that
so I'll let you be the judge of what's
most effective to help people because I
know that's your goal as well as mine
you can also just talk a little bit if
you want I don't have any problem having
a bit of a lecture so okay sure
so I'm gonna explain one concept which I
suspect may lay the foundation for our
discussion may or may not and as it
crops up and then I'll start asking you
more personal perfect let's do questions
so I'm gonna just lay a little bit of a
foundation for with like a five minute
segment so what a clear mind does the
best work right yes totally one of the
biggest problems that
clouds of mind is attachment to
particular things and so one of the
goals of meditative practice is to be
detached from the outcomes of your
actions so this is a Sanskrit word
called Vairagya and they see they
believe that like peace comes from
Vairagya so just to give you an example
you know if I like a girl and I want to
ask her out
I can torture myself all kinds of ways
about whether she's gonna say yes how to
get her to say yes things like that
well some of that could be calculated
like I could do certain nice things I
can dress a certain way I can get her
flowers whatever so there is some value
to sort of that that kind of
self-flagellation that I put myself
through but at the end of the day the
best course of action is probably just
to ask her out with confidence and then
let her decide right I don't try to
control whether she says yes or whether
she says no but that's not how we
actually operate we try to control
whether she is going to say yes or say
no and in the process of controlling how
another human being reacts we torture
ourselves so much up with me yeah it's
the it's the rain the rain acronym from
meditation right rain is uh recognize
acknowledge introspect and then
non-attachment
yeah perfect right so fight argue is
that last part yeah where are you
ultimately you kind of say and the funny
thing is that if you think about like
what kind of person is gonna say yes
like I realized this in my own life
shockingly so you know I had a very
unsuccessful dating life until I sort of
and entered into a relationship and then
really stopped caring because I was in a
relationship right and then started
hanging out with people and then
suddenly like women are treating me very
differently and I was trying to think
about like why is that the most extreme
of which was I don't even know if I
should share this because I don't have
this person but so one day I was on call
at the hospital right and someone that I
had worked with showed up intoxicated at
2:00 in the morning okay and was playing
Pokemon go and I was like woman what are
you doing here I
and she was just and so then I was like
look I'm busy but it's great to see you
have fun catching your Pokemon and you
know as much as I don't I mean I have to
think that people don't just show up at
the hospital when you're working like
they know you're on call right oh it's
the middle of the night and so I have to
think about like how does that happen
right did I suddenly magically become
more attractive I don't think so
I think what happened is like I stopped
I you know I started just behaving with
confidence and that actually like gets
the outcome that you sort of want but
the more that you worry about the
outcome the harder the outcome is to
attain totally yeah yeah that
overanalyzing an analysis paralysis
those things [ __ ] people it happens a
lot in public speaking absolutely right
so so when when public speaking is
another great example of like the goal
is to just go up there and talk about
what you want to talk about don't worry
about the thousands of people so one bit
of advice that I got about public
speaking is pretend you're talking to
one person don't talk to an audience
talk to one person works really well so
the the challenge though is a lot of
people say if I become detached from the
consequences of my actions doesn't that
mean that I stopped caring and this is a
big challenge where people say like but
caring about the outcome is what has
driven me to succeed so far so like if I
stopped caring about the outcome doesn't
it mean that I'm not gonna be successful
and the short answer is no because
there's a difference between apathy
which is not caring and attachment which
is detachment is giving it your all and
not worrying about the consequence not
being paranoid about the consequence
such reality to do absolutely it's a
hard duality absolutely so I suspect
that when we come to you know this is
just because I've done a lot of kind of
corporate consulting and stuff and
generally this conundrum comes up where
people recognize that fear of
consequence and a particular consequence
is what has allowed them to get to this
point but that like they can still
perform but it causes them intense
personal suffering and it's my
hypothesis that intense personal
suffering doesn't actually lead to
optimal performance and
when I talked to more and more people
like you and I asked you when do you do
your best work it's not when you're
suffering it's when you're devoted to
the action at hand and you're calm and
you're thinking clearly
well it's flow State it's magic set me
high and and flow state for sure so
let's talk a little bit about your
personal any questions about that so far
not for me no I got it okay so let's
talk a little bit about your personal
situation and kind of what you find
stressful within the bounds of what you
can yeah of course
the the thing that stresses me out the
most I guess is you every human well I
don't know I will talk about me I want
credit for good intentions now what that
means is when I bust my ass on something
and I attempt to do my best work and it
falls short I already know that and so I
want help fixing it not repeated
pointing out that it didn't meet the bar
until my highest stress specifically
comes from feeling misjudged so here's
an example I can talk about that's
outside of work but very crystalline I
had a doctor's appointment and the
doctor had two offices small medical
procedure doesn't matter what I was
getting I was getting something removed
off my skin but I went to the wrong
office because they had two offices and
I confused the office so I was there on
time but at the wrong office and so as
an example you can excavate that has
nothing to do with the Amazon but shows
the problem is I just beat myself up
like oh my god this has to be
rescheduled and he's a specialist and
it's gonna take three months to get back
on his calendar and how could I be so
Dominus to go to the wrong office and I
just got into a very because I'm a
high-performance person I was down on
myself for having
done something so foolish or small as to
pick the wrong doctor's office and the
same thing happens at work where you
have total right intentions you do
everything you set up the appointment or
you do the work you deliver the work and
then it falls slightly short or there's
a good intention but small mistake and
basically in our workplace added to my
own maybe recriminations on myself would
be workplace negative feedback of likes
little you know you've made an error and
we need to make sure that you know
you've made an error because we're busy
setting the standard the performance
culture okay I see a little bit of a
fork in the road in terms of we're
talking more about you because I think a
lot of this so I think that so I mean do
you want to talk about the workplace and
stress or do you want to talk about you
like I kind of I want to talk about I
thought that would be a good I think
it's a great yeah it's great
well I thought it would be good about
how to manage stress and I think because
I think most of the stress comes from
inside ourselves ABS right it's it's yes
other people may add to it or attempt to
add to it but how we process that
determines how much it impacts us
beautiful right so that's the that's the
fork in the road that I see is I think a
lot of this comes from you it has
nothing to do with Amazon's work culture
like all those work culture probably
like is synergistic with it but this
comes from you okay let's talk about
that I wanted something so and how long
how long have you been beating yourself
up for making silly mistakes
oh geez my whole life okay yeah I know
my family particularly my father did
that so going all the way back to like
childhood experience my father was very
down on himself for simple mistakes
[Music]
he believed that there was no such thing
as an accident
that that there was only carelessness
and so I grew up in a culture and the
classic example we talk about my family
of this is his coffee cup our family
coffee cups had saucers and if he
spilled coffee bumped his cup so that
coffee went over the edge end of the
saucer he would say oh what an idiot
what a complete fool and that was his
judgment of himself for having spilled
coffee which you're like oh my god you'd
you know wipe it up throw it out like
who cares but I grew up in a family
culture where there wasn't any such
thing as a mistake there was only
carelessness so that's kind of
interesting because you're talking about
your dad modeling yes self-critical
nests and sort of a lack of compassion
or forgiveness or a lack of acceptance
that everything isn't perfect correct
and that you know life sometimes has a
certain amount of randomness to it but
in his mind there's no such thing as
randomness there was just a lack of
preparation to account for randomness
right right right so that's him what
about you
uh I definitely internalize that but
don't you say that about stuff that you
did oh yeah for sure
like what
so I grew up on a farm and we used to
have a lot of power tools and sharp
things and his advice to me all through
my life was it's not if it's when
meaning it's not if you cut yourself
it's win and so eventually when I was 17
I cut I was I was out cutting brush and
I cut the end off my thumb like just a
little chunk but I didn't know how much
I'd cut off so I ran into the house like
holding my thumb inside my hand and I
said dad I need you to take me to the
hospital I cut off part of my thumb and
he started a lecture like he started to
say I've told you and I told you this
was come
and how could you be so stupid now I was
I was older at that point I was 16 so I
was mature enough to say dad you can
yell at me later we need to go and he
was able to cut it off at that point
until it you know he had enough
rationality like okay that's a good
point
but his initial instinct was lecture me
on carelessness can so I think that
carries forward how does it feel to tell
that story well knowing uh you know I
have my audience on your audience I how
does it feel it feels embarrassing right
that that was the environment because
we're trained not to share I we I don't
know I am trained not to share internal
family skeletons and so to talk poorly
of your father or an experience you had
it's embarrassing it's humiliating who's
being humiliated I don't know I feel
humiliated like I feel that whether I
should or not I feel like oh I'm part of
a family that had flaws that was not
that had this weird behavior and so
that's embarrassing yeah so I think that
feeling makes a lot of sense how did you
feel when your dad started lecturing you
at that moment I felt shocked I felt
like wow this is inappropriate and
that's in fact why I was able to
interrupt it uh-huh because what's led
to a lot of my career success is I'm
very processed and outcome oriented and
so I was able to prioritize and say so
yeah sometimes I interrupt people when
they're talking right go ahead
okay please so when when someone is
lecturing you for a mistake that you
know you made how do you feel
lecture for them is I feel bad I feel
doubly bad because I already know okay
so what is bad so bad as an umbrella
motion what is the emotion underneath
the bat
what a feeling the feeling I'm feeling
is inadequate that if I had done better
not only would the results have been
better but now I would not be getting
told that the result was not good I
wouldn't be getting lectured okay so I
think there's in adequacy which is what
you put on yourself right I think
there's another shade of an emotion
there which has to do with the
interaction of reporting okay right so
in once again I'm fishing right but
there's a second feeling right one is
you know you [ __ ] up that's the
inadequacies at the carelessness that's
what you guys do you want to know what
the other feeling is there's some
another feeling feeling when you walk
into the room and you have to report to
your superiors that the program that
you're running isn't up to par you felt
inadequate the night before yes you
realized it wasn't there there's another
feeling when you go in there's a fear of
being judged so there's fearfulness
and/or shame because you're about to
expose your feeling of inadequacy to
someone else
uh-huh and so remind me again what were
you feeling as you told that story
humiliation and what were you afraid of
exposing that exposing exposing the
family weakness yeah yeah do you think
those are related
of course particularly when you draw
them out that way
yeah well because I and I think a lot of
people that I project I try to project
competence
I try to be competent and I wish to be
viewed as competent and so when I have
to admit to an error I do it but it puts
a hole in my shell or image of
competence at least to myself even if
not to others
absolutely okay so
so I know I mean I'm sorry cuz I go for
it tricks to what I do but I think that
when you were telling that story you
were not just experiencing emotions from
the present I think you were
experiencing the emotions of that moment
because that's what happens when we
remember things right you replay yep
right so I think there's a certain
amount of humiliation that you feel
because you're airing your dirty laundry
on stream right there's a certain amount
of recalled humiliation because that's
how it feels when someone tell like just
think about this for a second when I cut
off a piece of my thumb right and I go
to someone and they say hey dumbass you
cut off a piece of your thumb right like
humiliation is at the top of the list
for how you feel it's like yeah I know
all right and you're telling me that
like your biggest problem is that like
you don't get credit for trying your
biggest problem is that like you know
you know you messed up you know it's not
good enough you don't actually have a
beef with that because you know given
time and support you will fix it because
that is what you [ __ ] do yes you will
fix it yourself yeah it's just why can't
other people see that correct you nailed
it so then the question becomes where
does that come from right so the only
person who is concerned about their
image the maintenance of their image is
the person who doesn't actually have
confidence in themselves okay
and the weird thing is that you do have
confidence in yourself except for the
times that you don't of course yes does
that make sense yes like because I know
I can tell already that like I know that
you get the job done like I know that
you will double down and you will make
sure that given time like you just have
to account for certain variables market
forces changes in X Y Z you will get it
done right and so I know that you're
confident in yourself but something
happens something awakens within you
that makes you feel the same way that
you did when you cut off your thumb and
your dad is lecturing yes and even in
that moment there's that feeling of
humiliation and then there's the there's
like the functional executive at Amazon
Ethan that was
already alive at the age of 16 and says
hey dad you can lecture me later right
now this [ __ ] needs to get taken care of
yep and even now when you feel that
humiliation when you walk into that
boardroom there's a part of you that's
like your 16 year old self which says
this just needs to get addressed and
it'll be okay if you guys just cut me
some slack and then there's the part of
you that feels humiliated right that's
right let's jive yeah I've definitely
had that experience at work also they're
like oh yeah yeah yeah what is that that
you said so much there but I don't I
didn't understand it I don't know people
understood
what is that that's it what is that well
it's for me that uh was I do it to
myself and at some level I'm choosing
the feel the way I feel I'm choosing I
know I can get the job done but the
process of having other people give me
feedback or be skeptical of that fact
for a minute
hurts yeah absolutely so let's dig into
that right because you said something
about I forget exactly your exact
phrasing but you were saying something
along the lines of that you know when
what you know you're gonna get it done
but they don't see that so you have to
try extra hard to like feel like but use
the word shell I think yeah right
he's right can you share that can you
just say a little bit more about that I
think that's important so because of our
performance culture and because of the
patterns you've observed you know and
can predict that when a mistake has been
made or something isn't going as planned
or isn't achieving goals that that
feedback about that is coming and so
there is absolutely a psychological
process of armoring yourself putting up
your shell whatever you want to call it
and say okay I know we have a we have a
leadership principle again or it's
talked about a lot in Amazon it's been
written down before called vocally
self-critical where we expect leaders in
the company to acknowledge their
mistakes and and we call it vocally
self-critical where we expect them to
actually talk about I and my team's
performance was not good enough itemize
how because the concept is make sure
that we don't call things good when
they're not or that we don't have
defensiveness about performance in other
words the goal is whether it works or
not the mental goal is that we want
leaders that can introspect and accept
the fact that it may not have worked or
may not be meeting goals and can then
take steps to address it but vocally
self-critical has unfortunately built
into it a bit of a public abasement
element right like it and I don't know I
don't know how to disentangle those two
yeah so I think that you know once again
that's kind of a cultural thing where I
think that you know being self-critical
in and having like external audits and
things like that or a healthy part of
becoming better at your job
so in psychiatry for example we have
something called supervision so in
supervision what happens you can have
peer supervision so a group of
psychiatrists will get together right
and like one of them will present a case
they'll say like okay I'm I'm working
with this case she has anxiety this this
this I've tried this I've tried this I
don't know what's going on it doesn't
seem to be working so we also vocally
share our shortcomings in terms of work
performance yep and and we also are
inviting people to actually audit so
usually if you do a really formal
supervision like you'll write up between
three and five pages about a case from
start to finish and you'll hand it to
someone and say like okay I started this
medication at this time I did this at
this time I did this at this time right
oh I I guess I'm sorry my I'm speaking
too loudly it's okay you're excited I do
the same thing so and and so what
happens is there's also like an audit
process yeah there's also a self
critical aspect to it but I think that
something has happened in in y'all's
culture where it does become shaming in
some way yes and that's that's both what
I experienced myself personally and at
work yeah and I think it's true of parts
of the culture and so I'm looking for
how to address that for myself and
ideally at least for my section of the
culture so let's just take a step back
away from culture because I think that's
a number of conversation let's focus on
you for me yep when did you start
putting your armor on I definitely put
on armor very early in my childhood I'm
the youngest child my house was
combative verbal no didn't have physical
abuse but verbal arguments amongst
siblings and parents was common and so
[Music]
so I developed a very thick armor the
result of which is as an example I can
generally do things many people can't if
you and I were to meet and you were to
yell at me like literally yell at me or
get red in the face or shout or or I
could
mostly turn that off and expert later
but I could experience it and not run
from the room or be broken down or
because I'm used to that environment
yeah I mean it almost sounds like a
dissociative capacity yes I don't know
all the right words but that is correct
I can I can just sort of leave the room
mentally and be like okay this is going
on how does it feel to say that well
I've talked about it with it's not new
to me to discuss it because I I've
discussed it with other professionals
but it's weird I will admit I have a
certain I value it and also don't want
it because I know it's built up from
adverse experiences but I also know its
utility in a crisis mm-hmm very good
right so there's a certain amount of
almost pride and comfort in it yes I got
what I thought was just a hint of
sadness sure yes there's a it's cut me
off from people in other words I've been
described as cold and certain I spent my
whole life at some level adapting
because when I left my household and
went to college I having grown up on a
farm you could even say I was poorly
socialized or a relatively few social
interactions compared to others I didn't
understand that the whole world didn't
interact that way hmm so like I would
resolve conflict by shouting or you know
by getting animated and I had to quick
and I'm a big guy you can't necessarily
tell but I'm six-two
I also used to be heavier and so I was I
was obese basically so I was I was about
280 pounds and I was kind of a huge guy
and so when that huge young man got
fired up other people were like what the
hell is this and so I had to learn to
dial back like oh the rest of the world
doesn't actually interact by shouting at
abuse newsflash
that's impressive that you were able to
because a lot of people aren't able to
rewire like that lifetime journey
right you know I'm 50 now and you know
that's a 20 year old me that had to
learn those lessons Ethan can you tell
me about your mom sure my mother so I'm
the youngest and so both my parents have
passed away essentially of old age at
this point my mom died last summer she
was very critical and specifically at
some point I don't know my late 30s or
40s I said mom you never actually say
you love me or you love your kids and
she said yeah I can't my mom never did
it for me I can't say I physically
cannot say I love you so that was an
interesting and for my mom nothing was
ever good enough
she was the matron of the family the
stronger personality and yeah so she
drove she drove people very hard I think
the best ensured it well I probably
given you everything you need to know by
saying she felt she couldn't say you
love she loved you but I do you think
what do you think I need well I mean
just enough information about my mom a
president only about your mom uh it
tells me she had her own issues right
that they she expressed that her mom had
never expressed love for her
very unusual for that generation my my
grandfather actually divorced my
grandmother which in the 1920s and 30s
was unusual and so in reconstructing it
my mom doesn't did not have a positive
relationship with any male in her life
Ethan what is what does all this say
about her son
what can I understand about her son from
understanding who she is
uh that's a question I haven't thought
about yeah you thought
a lot about this haven't you oh yeah
sure
well I'm so I should share I guess I'm
an insight junkie like in other words
what I specifically mean by that is I
was excited to talk to you not only
because I think it's good twitch and
good for my community good for yours
but because I'm always interested to
learn more about myself
yeah and so like my whole team yesterday
is a different I'll come back to your
point took the disc test together
yesterday my whole leadership team about
30 of us in a room going through
personality profiles because I'm always
looking for more insight so I said it's
been a lifetime journey to modify my
behavior that is true and so what you're
seeing is yes 30 years of working to
understand why do I behave like I do
what part is valuable and innate and I
should keep an enhance and what part
should I control or filter the
relentless pursuit of positivity and
growth yes and the relentless part is
fairly strong they're like I'm over
index on it
mmm-hmm yeah so well so the that you
know the the the unfortunate thing about
the relentlessness is that it's fueled
by a sense of inadequacy I agree with
that yes I'm aware of that so that's a
problem right so then then like so now
we get to Vairagya and apathy because
the question is if we take away your
sense of inadequacy what happens ah so
I'd like to think I've matured to where
I'll continue to work on be if I could
take away your inadequacy with a snap of
a finger would you want me to in this
moment yeah totally I am because I
believe I I still do a lot of the things
I do I have inadequacy
is not my only motivation so I don't
fear collapse into inaction but because
my only motivation is covering my
inadequacy the inadequacy is deep and
real yeah but I've matured no I know
that but it's it's I've matured enough
to where I want to be I want to
contribute positively to the world
because I have skills and value I can
offer and not because I must in order to
validate myself good so that's the
Dharma for anyone who's curious you guys
just heard it okay um and but let's kind
of go back to so so we kind of so you
have a tendency to kind of abstract and
explain things to me yes like I analyze
yeah very much so
right and and I think the challenge here
is gonna be that you have you don't
actually give me data you give me
conclusions okay so that that's sort of
a double-edged sword because when I ask
you a little bit about where does this
come from you already have the perfect
story you're like oh it's this story and
you also youselves a very interesting
thing when you related the story about
the coffee cup this is the story that my
family talks about yeah okay right so it
sounds like this has been well discussed
mauled over chewed yeah so the challenge
here is gonna be that we have to get to
the questions that you haven't asked
yourself yet okay that go function once
again is this one which is what does
that say about her son so you were
talking about your mom as someone who's
incapable of saying I love you who has
never had so so many like analytics
about me I feel unloved right I was
always seeking it's the same thing at
work I'm seeking positive feedback and I
have an endless desire an unmet desire
for it like I'm a I'm a black hole of
wanting more positive feedback that's
how it says yes you're so good at
sterilizing how you feel you're a black
hole for wanting positive feedback like
I didn't know black like what are you a
black hole for even feeling loved III
want oh yeah I'm glad you can say it you
see how your mind did that yeah I'm not
exactly sure what you're driving at
about sterilizing but I get the point
that I I step away from
the person using the words of deep
personal emotions yes
right which is back to your dissociative
capability okay right so like you step
away and that's also the how you feeling
you feeling okay
yeah I'm fine okay yeah I know I mean I
feel a little bit of anxiety but nothing
that's distressing me has that changed
recently in this talk yeah
is that anxiety you felt at the
beginning or is it changing there's a
little there's a little bit of anxiety
about addressing feeling deep personal
emotions and talking about them yeah
because it's vulnerability its
vulnerability to talk to you and to
anyone about deeply personal not to
anyone I but is it that also I think is
a great intellectual analysis of
yourself so close your eyes for a second
okay tell me what you feel what is that
anxiety what is Vault because it's not
anxiety its vulnerability okay right
that's what you feel okay and tell you
what about it what does it feel like
physically it's in the pit of my stomach
there's a tightness there's a there's a
there's a tightness in my stomach about
that comes from feeling exposed alright
eyes closed yeah and feeling exposed
good yeah right so you don't want to
feel exposed there's a part of you so
that tightness in your stomach is kind
of fear yeah it's fear how long how
familiar is that sensation in your
stomach before yes do you remember the
first time that or an early time that
you felt it I certainly remember the
first time I can consciously remember
feeling afraid
I don't know if I felt a pit in my
stomach does those were fear of physical
things okay so do you remember feeling
this sensation in particular before yeah
I think even early as time would be when
I was five okay we're talking about this
sensation right yeah tell me about when
you were five what happened um when I
was five it's a dramatic memory I've
kept all this time I first got an
understanding of the concept of death
and I became afraid of what it meant for
the world to go on without me I had this
I had this sense of like oh one day I
will end and the world will continue and
that was a fearful of realization for me
so that's the first thing I can think of
where I'm like Oh what did you do with
that feeling
talk to someone about it I went and
talked to my dad about it and What did
he say
so I asked my dad what happens when we
die and he gave me a scientific answer
he said oh well first your heart stops
then your brain stops and I interrupted
him I said no no dad what happens to me
and he said well some people believe
there's a heaven
I believe you're just gone
gruffly do you remember how you felt
when he said that uh I don't remember
clearly I remember you time after like I
can't tell you what I felt at that
instant sure of course what I what I
felt in gears that followed was wow
that's horrible that's not a feeling
that's a thought that's okay I continue
to feel afraid right I'm I I continue to
feel afraid of non-existence of losing
that sense of myself and that drove yeah
well that's going into what happened
after but I felt worried about that
concern and in fact that was an origin
of my disassociative ability because
that thought was scary enough for me
that I learned to put it aside and say
okay I've thought about that enough for
the moment or I felt it enough it's
becoming uncomfortable I'm going to
package that aside and come back to it
when I'm ready for more so I got very
good at turning that feeling off yeah
right so and and you're doing it you're
doing a great job I'm tying everything
together if I don't have to tie together
anything for you you're doing it all by
yourself
all right so I think we have two
challenges Ethan one is that so you're
tying I mean beautiful like I should
just jot this down and fuss about it in
peer supervision because it's all laid
out right so yeah our experience when
you were five you felt I mean so I think
there's there's there's a staggering
amount of being left hanging by your dad
yeah of being like alone in the wind it
wasn't a supportive answer for sure yeah
yeah did did nothing to make me feel
better made me feel worse like cuz he
was my idol right he's my father I'm a
young kid a boy and here he is like I'm
like dad what happens when we die and
he's like well you cease to exist in
your body brats
what are you feeling now now we're
getting somewhere now you're feeling now
the armor is coming down what is that
what are you feeling when you talk about
your dad when you tell that story you be
I feel let down
I feel abandoned right I feel vulnerable
again as I did war
I see anger oh yeah oh yeah fair yeah
yeah I know yes I agree with that I I
like I'm gonna over intellectualize bear
with me a second I feel like my parents
did the best they knew how and they gave
me a financially secure home with a big
drive for education but emotionally they
did a fairly [ __ ] job how do you feel
about that uh I feel like it left me
with that lifetime of work to try and
put it back together that I've discussed
and so and I have kids myself so I feel
motivated not to inflict that on them
right to be a different person
Ethan if someone treated your kids the
way that your parents treated you how
would you Ronald that I'd throttle them
I the rage with I guess I would enter
that would be like Papa Bear is coming
to clear the room yeah and how do you
feel that no one did that for you yeah
one was there yeah your parents treated
you the way that they did and there was
no papa bear that's right
yeah I feel that brings on more sadness
I feel more less anger than more just
God that sucks and so I don't want that
for anyone else so I think we've got to
two challenges with you okay okay only
two
I'm doing well yeah so one is like what
all these feelings are and I think you
do a very good job of divorcing yourself
from some of your feelings right because
like I don't like I can point and I
think it's clear to me that you've done
a lot of reflection I think you've come
a very long way because just that what
you're saying is like your gift you're
not giving me a rough draft you're
giving me like something for something
very close to a final product there's a
lot of the people that I talk to they're
giving me like really rough drafts and
our goal is to get to where you are 15
minutes into the interview okay so and
I'll just say like an example of this is
that you're not able to notice the anger
right away but if I point it out to you
you're like yeah it's there and we can
get closer to it if I ask certain
questions that actually do the
depersonalization for you so if I ask
you how you feel what kind of answer do
I get uh you get a feeling nope nope
good again okay when you ask me how I
feel you get a story and a picture of
what I've learned sure yeah what you've
learned that's the operative thing right
I get an intellectual answer yeah okay
and then like they're there moments
where you have your feelings and those
moments are actually when you step
outside of yourself and you look at the
situation so when you imagine how your
dad like it's almost like you're being
Papa Bear for yourself when you talk
about like that anger that I get from
you that visceral anger is like when
you're recalling how your dad treated a
five-year-old that's what gets the Papa
Bear anger out okay and that Papa Bear
anger is there yeah
right but when you just view it from
yourself you're it's like hard for you
to embrace that Papa Bear anger I don't
think you are letting yourself feel that
and then if I ask you about the kitten
are you getting emotional now no no not
at all I'm laughing I'm laugh
myself because you're right and I you
know yeah so so if I ask you about your
kids then the Papa Bear anger is like
that's what you feel for yourself right
and then you also make these kind of
interesting statements which I think
you've done a lot of processing on right
like you kind of say oh my parents
didn't do good enough right which is
sort of an analytical statement but at
the same time like that's such a watered
down diet version whether your life was
right like so yeah they didn't do good
enough but like think about what it was
actually like for you to grow up in that
household okay yeah you're right I'm I'm
reticent to whine on stream I guess yeah
my my childhood I could tell again no
physical abuse really but I could tell
bad household stories yeah yeah so I
grew up in a you know in a verbal II and
intellectually abusive environment yes
and hurt and I yeah good so and I think
once again like even that like the
subtle thing there is you say I don't
want to whine on stream where no one's
whining I lurve four thousand eight
hundred and nineteen people watching on
my end I don't think a single one of
them thinks you're whining okay that
whining is your self judgment and your
distancing of the way that you feel okay
that's why you use the word one cuz
you're like [ __ ] Ethan like why are
you whining about this [ __ ] right okay
that's like what your dad or mom told
you the whole time like I don't care
about your feelings like why do you feel
that way like Ethan that's unproductive
okay fair yes so there are two things
here one is like you know what the
source and you've done it just once
again masterful job like you know when
we talk about the void like the void of
I forgot what how you black hole black
hole of hunger in for positive reading
or for love hunger for positive yeah
there's that kind of stuff right which
is like generally speaking when we talk
about feelings like that's the Epiphany
that we want people to have right they
say oh I have a black hole in my heart
for a lot
that's what people tune in for from a
voyeuristic aspect I don't know I don't
know that that I mean I think that can
be significant for you but I think what
is far more significant for you is not
to try to do the things that other
people here do on soon because you're
not them like most of the people that I
interview in there earn their 20s right
I haven't they just haven't gotten there
/ played when it comes to life is just
way smaller than yours right and you
have lived a life of reflection
introspection and dedication to
self-improvement which is remarkable and
so I think the thing that we need to
teach you more than anything else is
like show you how you step away from
just huge parts of yourself okay
the goal here for you is no long is not
like revelation it's integration because
I think you already know you just choose
not to like let that be a part of you
okay I have you know I would think that
someone in your shoes would feel angry
with their parents like you have every
right to be angry with your parents I
guess I but you're not angry with your
parents because what you do you're so
[ __ ] understanding that you when I
asked you about your parents you say she
didn't grow up in a household of love so
you give them excuses for their behavior
just help is helpful it allows you to
forgive but also should not be done to
the exclusion of your feelings okay both
of those have to be there right you have
to understand ago I disassociated I'm
like well yeah I got it I give them a
pass and so then being angry with them
has no point because being angry with
someone who didn't I make excuses for
them I got absolutely yeah right so
you're doing fantastic so now it comes
to back to your job and our stress yeah
and when you walk into that boardroom
yeah and I think the reason that those
feelings because it's kind of weird
right you're able to handle so many
different things you're able to grow in
spite of so many different challenges
you're able to achieve so why is it that
you know armor wearing shell owning
dissociative Ethan has trouble when he
walks into that room
because you're the one who says if
someone's yelling in your face you can
handle that why is it so hard for you to
do this thing and put on your armor at
that point because there's a part of me
that says well maybe it goes a little
bit well what is hard I'm afraid maybe
they're right
I'm afraid maybe the attack is right
maybe oh boy if you go all the way back
to it I guess you and there's a part of
me that feels like well maybe I earned
or or maybe my parents didn't do wrong I
I was the problem right so there's a
there's a confidence problem or a
self-value again those are intellectual
words the fear that the root fear is
maybe they're right maybe I'm not worthy
maybe it's it's all of that and so it's
fear that you're not good enough that I
am not good enough
and and where did you learn that home
absolutely right so now we understand
that like I think so part of the problem
here is that you dissociate parts of
yourself
but those dissociated parts don't go
away they just lie dormant right and
there are some situations that cause the
volcano to erupt because all that
magnets down there yes and so the
solution to you no longer feeling that
way is to like you know like drain the
abscess do you know what an abscess is
yeah I do and I can hear my wife
laughing downstairs cuz we talked about
the volcano inside me and she just she
just the stream just caught up to those
words and and she was busted out okay
cuz it's real yeah so so yeah I can have
a dramatic rage outbursts yeah they're
they're very rare and tightly controlled
but that's like the button-up armor
and if that gets out you know I'm a
booth the gaming term I go berserk I'm a
beserker and I like when I tip over it's
all that's what happens right like with
the dissociation with the armor there
all of the feelings that you understand
and are okay with and then there's all
the stuff that doesn't help you
that cannot be intellectualized the
stuff that's a little bit irrational and
all that stuff goes beneath the surface
and that stuff sometimes gets a vocht
when you walk into a particular room at
work it hits too close to home so
there's some there are some avenues
there are some tunnels to like the magma
at the center of the earth that evoke
that more often and if you're wanting to
stop feeling that way like sure you can
go to thing I mean you can go to therapy
and maybe you should I mean I don't know
if you've seen people in the past or
yeah you can talk about the absence of
love in your life in the black hole of
love and that's such beautiful juicy
like some juicy therapy imagery it's
like oh my god it just gets therap is so
excited when we yeah this is what we got
into it for but I think oddly enough
ethan i think your path is actually more
not so much the path of therapy although
that can be helpful but it's the path of
meditation is that a path of yoga is the
path of understanding how your mind
functions and then once you understand
how your mind functions changing a
couple of levers so it stops doing the
things that it's doing right now and the
simplest of that is to stop dissociating
and start integrating to understand that
just because you're a level-headed guy
doesn't mean like it's weird because
you're a level-headed guy in you're a
berserker like you got a that's got a
meet somewhere in the middle for you to
be integrated like that's the goal yeah
yes there was a period earlier in my
life where I sought perfection and
absolutely said your point about
disassociation people would say to me
you're only well you're only human and
I'd say yeah that's a flaw
yeah but then then yeah there's a lot
other stuff too like these patterns that
you have about yourself and where you
learned that right well I was trying to
be unemotional
in other words because done you've done
a very good job because knowing that the
emotion is volcanic and uncontrolled the
first path is well just don't be that
yeah because because there's no scuzz
it's careless to be emotional yeah it's
the definition of carelessness
uncontrolled no coffee on the saucer
Ethan not allowed no no coffee on the
saucer so but I am very interested I
would like to be more integrated right I
strive to be a whole person I want that
and not to just intellectualize I not
only strive to be it I actually want it
I want to be at peace with myself yacht
in two pieces
yeah so beautifully set beautifully set
right and and that's that I don't know
if you read that something like you know
that's somewhere no that's like that's
that's great nice that's like you know
Lama level don't be in be with what do
you I don't even remember what you said
but we can we can clip that that was
profound you said something you said
something by saying I strive to be
integrated I want to be a whole person
not live in two pieces yeah yeah yeah it
was great right and I think it's yeah so
we're gonna start do you meditate I have
a little bit not regularly okay I really
I read what is it Dan Harris and 10%
happier you must know this book yeah
yeah so we're gonna teach you one form
of meditation today okay I don't mm I
think you should just start here
although I don't think this is the right
end game practice for you this is like
the preparatory practice okay the other
thing just in general that I think you
need to be doing is feeling more what
emotion do you think you need to feel
more of what do you think what right so
emotions are mad sad glad etc what
emotion do I need to feel more of
what do you need to let yourself feel
what's the anger absolutely good I'm
glad you got him right now my wife's not
gonna laugh so so it doesn't mean be
angry it means feel feel it okay because
here's the thing when you walk into the
boardroom and you're your performance is
not as good is it supposed to be we've
been talking about humiliation is how I
feel right but there's another thing
there when you walk in there and your
boss is saying hey Ethan you didn't do X
why is he like what's the other thing
that you feel pissed off that they're
observing the obvious and not helping
yes right there's anger there there's
total anger anger it's bizarre because
for most people anger covers up the
shame anger is a protective mechanism
you're so spiritually advanced that it's
gotten like reverse where do you feel
the inadequacy you see yourself and then
like you just don't let yourself feel
anger because I'm because the behavior
that follows really feeling angry is
confrontational so that's where you have
to learn that's your barrier of growth
right so just like like shame does not
lead to tears does it even know you can
control that yeah so the separation
between behaviors and feelings is there
for you in all emotions except for one
anger that's completely true and that's
why that's the one you need to feel okay
that's the great barrier of your growth
right so to feel angry to let yourself
feel angry because it's not it's not
about a lack of love it's not about any
of that juicy juicy Freudian
psychological goodness not being loved
by your mother and not being loved by
your father
it's about anger okay it's about being
pissed at the injustice of the world and
that's what you're angry at is the
injustice of it yeah okay that it's not
with their that your parents treated you
the way that they did and they shouldn't
have and it's not [ __ ] fair and you
understand that very well as soon as I
put your kids into their shoes no but
you don't let yourself feel that way
about
yourself yeah it seems disrespectful I
guess sure there are all kinds of good
reasons to not feel it up right there
there are good reasons why an
intellectual introspective reflective
and experienced person like yourself has
concluded to not feel those feelings and
you've got to feel okay okay so just
notice it throughout the week and then
from a very sort of like psycho physics
kind of perspective in my experience the
more that you experience those emotions
throughout the week and acknowledge them
when you have the opportunity to the
last blow ups you're gonna have okay
that's good and also the less cuz the
problem here is that right now the
reason that anger is so tied to behavior
is because the only time that anger you
like it rise lay there's a dam and
angers like rising on the other side and
then it floods over right and so no
wonder it's in controllable because it's
like the only time you see you get wet
is when it's flooded yes so that's got
to change right so you've got to start
irrigating a little bit letting it out a
little bit acknowledging a little bit on
a day-to-day basis I'm imagining
you're you're like colorblind for anger
in your day-to-day life people probably
call you for the most part a pretty
level-headed calm collected guy right
yeah usually yes yes with exceptions if
they've ever seen the damn bridge yeah
exactly so the way to get the dam from
breaking is to actually let the water
out from time to time that you have to
process your emotions as they arise that
acknowledge that you're feeling them
okay and so look for what the feeling of
anger is in your body and so notice like
your physical sensations kind of like we
did with the pit in the stomach that's
not anger that's something else yeah and
and just notice your anger and I'd say
that's the first step forward for you
okay and then I can teach you meditation
do you have any questions for me no I'm
super I mean I have a ton about how to
integrate the personality but I
I want to know more I don't think I
understand how to form a good question
other than to say yes I'm eager to learn
about that and to be able because I
don't like having the the disassociated
shell right I don't like and I try like
I try to share honestly who I am but
some parts of me are hard to let out
absolutely because that too is that's
adaptive like I think use fantastic work
so that was necessary for you to survive
and and now it's starting to you know
like most adaptations they're they're
adaptive in one area and then like
maladaptive maladaptive yeah that makes
perfect sense yeah so I think at this
stage in your life you know you've
managed a lot of different emotions
you've dealt with inadequacy and shame
and things like that but oddly enough I
think the you know the way for it is to
feel a little bit more anger and I'm
gonna teach you this I'll teach you a
very simple meditation practice that if
you do on a day-to-day basis will I
think help you a little bit with
managing your emotions as well
okay so sit up straight sit up straight
got it and then I can you do this and I
do yep good so with your right hand I
want you to block your right right
nostril and breathe in through your left
just breathe in and then switch and then
breathe out breathe in through the same
nostril switch breathe out in through
the same switch breathe out in switch
out in
switch out go ahead and close your eyes
continue at your own pace remember that
you inhale with the same nostril that
you exhale and that you switch on a full
breath
everybody's watching at home should do
this too
go ahead and do two more breaths and let
your eyes remain closed let your hands
relax
you
notice the natural slowing of your
breath and just sit with the person that
you are
now put your palms together in front of
you touching rub them together feel the
heat the friction and then cut them over
your eyes slowly open your eyes as you
exhale let your hands come down okay
feeling that's good that's very relaxing
you look different
well I think I bet that's true how do
you do - for the record yeah yeah works
on me - thoughts questions before we
wrap out for the day
uh no I'm eager to follow up in a week
like okay to try it some and and the
integration questions to have questions
don't even don't judge yourself for not
having questions just now I was just
checking I was checking with myself like
do I have a well formed question or some
heaven okay I know I wasn't I was I
judge myself plenty maybe but I was not
in that case good sorry for jumping to
conclusions no no it's actually when you
asked me to sit with myself I generally
like myself like that was not unpleasant
sitting with the person I am
was not a big running list of ways I
need to be different it was okay I'm I'm
fine how I am maybe I can also be better
but I'm fine how I am yes right yes so
that is you cultivate that sensation
more and more in meditation walking into
that room when your your product isn't
performing is gonna get easier and
easier okay that makes good that makes
complete sense because you're what
you've said in other words is you're no
longer attached to the result right
you're not attached to what's going on
in the room from a self valuation view
process you are just what you are right
that is the way that you actually exist
in this world and keep going on this
path and you'll even discover what
happens to you after death oh really all
right that's what they say
that's what it well eventually I'll
discover one way or the other one way or
the other
okay take care of it all right thank you
so much have a nice day bye well next
week same time yeah next week same time
I'll see you there bye okay so okay
we're gonna go to so regarding beating
yourself up for carelessness can you
explain what a healthy and productive
version of scolding yourself would look
like I will temporarily beat myself up
for stupid mistakes but move on quickly
so there's a difference between
reflecting and understanding that you
made a mistake and beating yourself up
those are like completely different
things right so you can do nothing wrong
and beat yourself up you can do a lot
wrong and not beat yourself up you can
do something wrong and beat yourself up
or you can do something wrong and not
beat yourself up right there's a
two-by-two table and just think about
this for a second completely independent
functions of the mind so if I like you
know
well let's say that I was I mean I use
some examples over and over again but
well I think infidelity is a good one so
if I'm unfaithful there are lots of ways
that I can do mental gymnastics and
convince myself that even though I did
something wrong objectively I won't beat
myself up for it I'll justify it I'll
give myself excuses right so you can do
something wrong and not beat yourself up
then there's like people who are highly
neurotic because like they don't
actually do something wrong like though
though walk down the street and they I
opened a door and I walked through the
door and I let go of the door and I
didn't realize someone was behind me and
that person put their hand on the door
kind of at the last second and opened it
and then walked out and I didn't hold
the door open for them and I'm like
beating myself up because oh my god that
person must think I'm a complete [ __ ]
and and things like that so even though
objectively you may not have really done
much like you just walked through the
door you're not responsible necessarily
for holding it like sure it's nice if
you hold it but you can still beat
yourself up over it right that's kind of
like social anxiety or you know
stealing's of inadequacy so you can have
a cognitive bias where even though
you're not doing anything wrong that
that you're you know you're still sort
of beating yourself up and then you can
do something wrong and you can beat
yourself up over it or you can do
something wrong and then you cannot beat
yourself up over it so case in point of
the last one at the beginning of the
stream if you guys were around you saw
the train wreck of the century in terms
of or not I mean onthe century but
probably the stupidest thing that I've
ever done on stream and I completely
acknowledge it was a terrible thing to
do and boy was that a mistake
like there is no question that what I
did was a terrible idea
and it's like did I beat myself up for
it no I'm not gonna do it again I'm
gonna learn from it I'm gonna learn
about how to do things better but I'm
not gonna beat myself up over it because
I acknowledge that I'm a boomer and as
we've talked about before boomer is my
armor right boomer is my excuse I'm a
boomer and I don't know how these I
don't know how the internet works uh
discord uh right and and then you know
like that's just I'm like there's this
gonna be like growing pains right
there's gonna be growing pains like I'm
gonna make mistakes on stream like this
is new to me like you know trying to
save the internet through AoE healing is
gonna like have a learning curve folks
so that's gonna happen from time to time
so question is how do you so yeah I
think what is like reflective and one is
like a sense of beating yourself up
which has to do with like ego and sense
of self like do you just acknowledge so
you have to acknowledge that there's a
difference between incompetence and
inexperience this is where I think a lot
of people get tripped up so the question
is like are you incompetent which is how
a lot of times how you feel about
yourself like you feel like oh I'm dumb
or like I'm socially bad right I'm
socially incompetent whereas if you
really stop and look at it like if you
spend ten hours a day playing video
games your social function isn't gonna
be good but that's not because you're
like socially like defunct in some way
it's because you're inexperienced
because you spend most of your time
behind a computer screen it's like you
wouldn't blame like a first year medical
student for not doing a good job in
surgery because they're just new to this
and if you spend most of your time
behind a computer screen like why would
you think that you're good with people
right so try to be a little bit
compassionate towards yourself try to
understand that there's a difference
between like you socking it life and you
being inexperienced at life and if you
guys saw like this interview is
different from any of the others and why
is that it's because Ethan has like more
XP he's like higher level he's
doing this a while his slash played is
like way higher than your slash blade so
the way that he manages his emotions in
the way that he understands himself is
gonna be different right yeah so just so
someone's saying we're news yes so let's
remember somewhere along the way newb
changed its meaning
remember noob has its origins I know
this because I'm a boomer and I was
there in the days when new book was born
I remember right so noob is a newbie
someone who's new someone who's
inexperienced but now what noob means no
noob no longer means inexperienced new
means new means you suck like not
inexperienced you suck so what you guys
have to do is remember there's a
difference between incompetent
inexperienced and are you allowed to
make mistakes given the situation and
chances are the answer is almost always
yes that like even in social situations
even in marriage and relationships like
you can have fights with your
significant other and you can have
challenges in your marriage and that
doesn't mean that like even though you
get better at marriage you continue
having challenges like that's how it
works
life continues throwing new things at
you which is how life is so you're gonna
continually make mistakes so don't worry
about it man relax a little bit have
some fun laugh at it okay can shaming
ever be productive and healthy for
self-improvement okay so this is a great
question okay can shaming ever be
productive and healthy for
self-improvement okay so the the tricky
thing here is the statement itself okay
so I'm gonna do this again or hopefully
this works okay I don't know if you guys
actually like this or not but I think
this is too good to pass up
okay alright let's look at the sentence
can Oh God
can shaming ever be productive and
healthy for self-improvement so now
we're gonna do something I have faith in
you chat so you guys tell me what do you
think the answer to this is okay so ah I
see some people are getting it okay so
what do you guys think about this right
can shaming ever be productive for
self-improvement and then what do you
guys think about this
[Music]
right there you have it well done twitch
chat beautiful answer the question so
now we get to like a couple of things so
a lot of times when we are asking
ourselves questions and we have
conceptions of the world we tie things
together like I this is gonna sound kind
of weird and abstract but a lot of your
growth is gonna come when you take the
things that your mind automatically
spits out so this is important to
understand this person just spat out
that sentence right so something in
their mind they think that like okay
productive because they acknowledge that
shaming can be productive but they know
that it's you're not supposed to do that
so they're like confused about like how
do you move forward right so like
separate out what is going in on in your
mind and like actually look at it
actually look at your thoughts and
you'll be amazed at what you can
discover when you apply your analytical
power which is what gamers are really
good at so I could give you like this is
a person this is a question that someone
asked me because I'm an expert right I'm
super smart Harvard and II hear yoga and
E meditation and E seven years in India
so you become a monk and E all of the
Andes and you can come to the answer
just that easily you can do it you could
do it all you have to do is analyze it
y'all are brilliant you just have to
know how to analyze it you just have to
give yourself the chance to reflect upon
your thoughts right you have to like
this is important it's hard to study
everything in your mind so put it out on
something and then leverage your full
analytical capability on it you will be
amazed at what you're able to accomplish
what you will understand about yourself
so can shaming ever be productive and
healthy for self-improvement
both of those things I don't think so
I think shame can definitely drive
productivity for self-improvement for
sure right that absolutely is it gonna
be healthy for self-improvement I don't
think so so shame can be like sort of
healthy in the sense that shame is a
regular part of life and we should
experience it but if you're using shame
to fuel self-improvement I don't think
that's usually healthy right maybe but
generally speaking no so I think the rub
is that how can you find
self-improvement
how can you motivate yourself towards
self-improvement without a negative
emotion driving it which kind of goes
back to the thing about anger okay
regarding a sense of inadequacy fueling
personal growth what does a relentless
pursuit of personal growth look like
when it's fueled in a healthy way
instead of fueled by an adequacy okay
okay this is good fun all right we're
gonna do this again okay you guys ready
this one's harder okay so you guys have
to give yourself some slack you can't do
it but okay okay
regarding sense of inadequacy fueling
personal growth what does relentless
pursuit for purse rope look like when
it's fueled in a healthy way
okay so twitch chat now this is gonna be
hard okay maybe cuz it's gonna be a
little bit read my mind I'm gonna tell
you guys that for
healthy personal growth there is one
word in this question which is wrong
that's just leet speak there we go okay
so fueled is misspelled but twitch at
figured it out look at that that's it
beautiful beautiful you guys see that
like you see how [ __ ] there we go like
like this person you can see this
person's psychology in terms of this you
did it you did it you did it you fix it
that's healthy ready
unhealthy healthy unhealthy healthy
unhealthy healthy good job good job dude
good job Twitter chat I wish I could
donate to twitch at I'd like sub and sub
the twitch chat was streaming I would
sub right there well done team but you
guys see that
so inadequacy is about like the the
relentless pursuit like why do you need
to be relentless if you're adequate but
you don't need to be relentless if
you're adequate like you're fine you
don't need to do anything just chill man
and like grow and improve when you feel
like it and when life demands it of you
and like that's it
so it's the relentlessness that's the
problem because relentless oh serious up
thanks for gifting
um relentlessness is like that's that's
from inadequacy right because you're
never good enough so you have to be
relentless the relentless pursuit so
anytime people are like relentlessly
pursuing self growth like I'm like dude
why do you need to grow like what's
wrong with you that you need to grow why
can't you just be good enough the way
you are that's healthy and then you can
grow like when you know there are times
that I mean I generally have a pretty
good opinion of myself and there are
times that like I need to learn and grow
like hey dr. K don't just chop a hop-on
discord when you're live on stream and
let the internet just say whatever it
wants to because that's just it's just
too good to pass up for some of those
people out there it's just too good
you just can't they just can't pass it
up right and come on can we really like
is that my mistake or is that their
mistake like let's be honest that's
probably on me because you know it's
just too good to pass up okay what do I
think about Ethan's level of
self-consciousness so in I think Ethan I
don't know what you mean by
self-consciousness but I mean I think
Ethan is highly self-aware of all of the
parts that he's self-aware of and that
he's unaware of something relatively
large in his psychology which is usually
how it works so Carl Jung talked about
something called the shadow which is
like the part of our mind that we sort
of don't acknowledge and he also said
that most of the growth comes from
exploring our shadows which sort of
makes sense because if you were aware of
it you would have like worked on it and
reflected and fixed it anyway so the
role of like an analyst a psychoanalyst
is to like help people explore their
shadows because that's the part that
they don't understand and I think that
sort of makes sense but it's not like
any sort of drastic you know deep
psychological concept or the shadow it's
just like if your house you know if you
have a leaky faucet you're not gonna fix
it unless you know it's leaking so the
things that you're unaware of
or where your kind of barrier of growth
is or where your opportunity of growth
is I think overall he's like quite
reflective and you guys could see that
like most of the correlations that I
draw for people on stream he was saying
on his own right and sometimes he had to
be pushed and prodded like he said I
have a black hole of relentless
something he's some lack of positive
reinforcement or something he said
something weird some weird you know
corporate speak about love and he's like
I'm like what is that and he's like oh
it's love so he's like pretty good at at
pushing the envelope but then there are
some areas where he has trouble right
because we have to kind of get to him in
different ways we can't ask him about
himself because if we ask him hey Ethan
what's going on in your head he's gonna
give us an answer that's gonna be like
all correct and like no flavor it's
gonna be like intellectually brilliant
and no I don't know if you guys saw but
like what there was a couple of times
during the interview where like he could
became animated and that's what we're
looking for that's what he's missing
okay when it comes to the Harma and some
scar is there a day when something just
clicks or is it something you notice
over time slowly and only realize it's
getting better after reflecting on it
okay we want to try discord again your
mods have have set up a veteran system
yeah okay so we're gonna answer both of
those questions at the same time but I'm
gonna get to this last question real
quick okay and then we're gonna move to
disco we're gonna try this again so
[Music]
how do I get rid of my sense of
inadequacy you have to figure out where
it comes from right so where did you
learn that you were inadequate the
second thing that you can do is meditate
because when you meditate I don't know
if you guys saw this but you know when
you meditate you don't feel inadequate
anymore right like you just feel like
yourself feel like you're just you
there's no inadequacy there's no
inadequacy you're just you you're just
like neutral adequacy and inadequacy
don't really apply like that's just not
a thing and so that's what happens when
you meditate a lot so like even though I
made a catastrophic mistake at the
beginning of stream like what buffers me
against that is just like that
meditative sense they're just like oh
that's just something that happens in
life sometimes you get on stream and you
you know shoot yourself in the foot and
other times you get on stream and
they're like 15,000 people watching just
what it is like you just sit there and
you just be yourself and let the rest of
the world like revolve around you
however the [ __ ] it wants to that's fine
no big deal okay okay we're gonna try
discord again okay okay